This is a short description and documentation for the project work. 

Name of the project: 
    Dynamics of small open quantum systems
main contributor: 
    Zoltán Guba

Description:
    "The theory of open quantum systems is the backbone of nearly all modern research in quantum mechanics and its applications.
    The reason is simple: the idealization of an isolated quantum system obeying perfectly unitary quantum dynamics is just that:
    an idealization. In reality every system is open, meaning that it is coupled to an external environment. Sometimes these open
    system effects are small, but they can almost never be neglected. This is particularly relevant in the field of quantum information
    processing, where the existence of a quantum advantage over classical information processing is often derived first from the
    idealized, closed system perspective, and must then be re-scrutinized in the realistic, open system setting." 
    source: https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.00967, Daniel A. Lidar

    The aim of this project is to numerically simulate the dynamics of open quantum systems using simple ideas and methods. 
    That is, a single electron double quantum dot (DQD) and a short spin chain is under investigation. For the DQD, the aim is
    to recover features shown in https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.06056, namely the features of Fig2a will be obtained during the investigation.
    Clearly, we will also discover differences as the referenced publication uses only the steady-state solution of the dynamics, which 
    already takes away the possibility to differentiate the ground and excited states of the system. 
    The investigation of the spin chain is purely led by curiosity: how efficient the method used for the DQD is to simulate spin chains 
    where the Hilbert space is much larger. Also we discover that the longest spin chain that can be simulated has length N=5, which clearly
    shows the need for better numerical methods. There are already methods which make us able to simulate quantum systems more efficiently, 
    but the aim here is to keep things as simple as possible. 

    Single electron DQD: The physical system is described in https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.06056. That is, a single-electron DQD is put in 
    a resonant RC circuit. This circuit is probed with an AC signal for which the magnitute and the phase shift of the reflected signal is 
    measured. With this the complex impedance of the circuit can be measured. Now if the DQD is put in this circuit, then during the probing 
    the electron moves according to the AC signal and generates a small capacitance and resistance. This small capacitance and resistance then 
    changes the complex impedance of the system. With this method the state of the electron can be measured in principle, as the capacitance and 
    resistance generated during the probing depends on the state of the electron. 
    The result of the simulation is the effective resistance of the DQD (also referred to as the Sisyphus resistance).
    
    Spin chain: The physical system is a simple one dimensional Heisenberg chain with the small twist, that only the left-most spin is affected by
    a time-dependent magnetic field and only the right-most spin is coupled to the environment via a large magnetic moment pointing in the y direction.
    At the beginning of the numerical simulation the spins point in the z direction. Then the magnetic is turned on which affects only the left-most spin.
    Then the system is left to time evolve and reach its thermal steady-state.
    The result of the simulation is the time dependent magnetization of the individual spins.
    By investigating the magnetizations under different circumstances (T=0, no magnetic field, no coupling, etc) the plots can be used to teach students
    about the effect of turning on and off different parameters in the systems. For example: what is the effect of coupling and turning on the temperature.
    
Results:
    For the DQD I show how the full dynamics effect the effective capacitance of the DQD shown in Fig2a of Esterli et al.. For the spin chain I carry out
    numerical simulations with different parameter regimes (no magnetic field, T=0) to show how turning on different physics affects the magnetizations.
    The former shows interesting contribution to an already published paper, while the latter is rather pedagogical.
    
Now I present the main method used for the numerical simulations. That is, I describe the main concept of the method which was used for both systems
(DQD and spin chain).

Method:
    1. construct the time-dependent hamiltonian: for the DQD this is just a 2x2 hermitian matrix that describes the system as a function of time. 
        For the spin chain, the dimensionality depends on the number of spins. For N=3 the Hamiltonian is a 2^3 x 2^3 hermitian matrix.
    2. construct the jump operators: the jump operators are non-hermitian operators that describe the coupling of the system to the environment.
        For example, given a single spin, the jump operator describing the downhill relaxation of the spin is simply the annihilation operator S-. 
        For the DQD the ground and excited states are calculated for each time instance and then the jump operators corresponding to the downhill and 
        uphill relaxation are constructed as |ground><excited| and |excited><ground|.
    3. construct the vectorized form of the Lindblad equation: the Lindblad equation involves rather complicated stucture of the density operator
        and the Hamiltonian and the jump operators, but it can be cast into a form where there is an operator acting on the density matrix. This operator
        is usually referred to as the Lindbladian superoperator (as it acts on an operator). 
        For the vectorization see the wikipedia page: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vectorization_(mathematics) .
    4. exponentialized the superoperator: to obtain the evolution of the density matrix the Euler method is used with the trick that we also exponentialized
        operator. With this we can conserve the trace of the density operator and there is no need for renormalization.
    5. calculate physical observables from the density operator: with the time-dependent density matrix other physical quantites can be measured by using 
        <O> = Trace(rho * O) expression. For the DQD the electric charge of the right dot is measured as a function of time while for the spin chain the 
        magnetization is the measured quantity.
        
This method is clearly not efficient as the Lindbladian superoperator scales with 4^N x 4^N. Because of that this idea can be utilizied only for systems
with a small Hilbert space. Nevertheless, the method is simple as requires only partial knowledge about the phyisics of open quantum systems. 